I have an indication here that you served for a
couple years as an officer in the architectural
club. Yes. Was that only architectural majors, or
could other students belong to that, too? There
weren't majors there. They're just architects.
Yeah, that's right. And you were at what? Were you
in the college of agriculture? I was president of
it the last year, yes. Was that, let's see, was that
point it was in the College of Agriculture, wasn't
it? More or less landscape architecture?
Engineering. Engineering. Dean Nigel's school.
Who was your faculty sponsor, if you recall? I'm
assuming that the club has had faculty sponsors
then as they do now. Well, we had two. Our first was
Alice Berger. And then the last year was,
I don't recall his name now, but he was head of the
department. Was this architectural club tied in
with some other, a nationwide students
professional organization or it was just a local
thing? Was it primarily, was it more inclined
towards a professional aspect of architecture or
was it really more of a social organization?
Professional. Professional. You met, regulated
to discuss architectural problems then? Yes. And
I also had an indication, you were an assistant
editor of the Architectural Yearbook. Was that a
fairly common thing then? Did the various
disciplines publish separate yearbooks? Well,
the architectural department had a yearbook,
yes. This would be what? Did you have pictures of
the students in them? Mostly student work. It
would be drawings that the students had done
during the year. There were projects they had done
during the year. And then as the editor and
assistant editor, I guess, would be the ones who
would choose which drawings would appear in the
book? With the faculty. They always worked with
us. And you also were on the battalion staff for a
couple of years, I believe. Yes. What role did you
play on that? Old little cartoons once in a while.
Anything else? No,
I don't. As art editor of the Longhorn, I gather you
did most of the drawings that appear. No, a big part
of that job is getting the other guys to work for
you. I did quite a few and I really enjoyed it. In
previous years you did some of the drawings for
other editors. Yes.
Did the art editor have anything to do with the
makeup of the Longhorn or did the printer decide in
what order the various segments? Now I know the
Longhorn is divided into the various classes and
has the military aspects and the social clubs and
so forth. Did you have much to say about how it was
organized, or did somebody else do that? No, no. I
don't know whether student staff did that, but
they, in general, followed the pattern of
previous issues. Okay, and I believe you were also
a member of the Ross Volunteers. Yes. Was that for
one year or two? Just one, last year. And how were
you named to that organization? I think my
roommate got me in. It wasn't my military ability.
Okay, it was supposed to have been, even at that
point I believe, it was supposed to have been
somewhat of a crack drill team. Did you do a lot of
extra drilling? Yes, we did. Okay, and so you
had... Double drill then, I take it, with your
regular company? Well, not really double, but
extra. Uh-huh. Regular drill with your company?
Yes. And about how often did you have that, if you
recall? The RV drills? No, the regular company
drill. Oh, I think every day. Uh-huh. For about how
long? Oh, in the afternoon, for an hour or so. And
then how much did you drill for the RVs? I don't
know, probably once a week or something like that.
What did the Ross Volunteers as a group,
what did they do or what was their contribution to
the school, I should say? Did they serve any
function other than... Well, they served as an
honor guard on special occasions and
I think that was the principal thing. And I think
they had a dance, a big dance. Oh, yes, the RV dance
in the spring was one of the three big dances. What
were the other two? The Thanksgiving hop and the
final ball. And I believe you had something to do
with the decoration of one of the Thanksgiving
tops. Oh, yeah, I got rubbed on that, too. Would
this be something that would take you an awful lot
of time to prepare all the decorations, or...? Not
a great deal. These were held where? In Spiesel
Hall. Spiesel Hall. So you would have to, what,
kind of get the people together to clear out after
you'd had the regular meal or it was in the same
dining area where you had the regular meal? Yes,
they gave us a paper sack lunch at noon and then we
cleared the hall. So you had the whole afternoon
then to get it ready? Yes. I think about the, I had
more fun than I would have at one of the dances, but
They put meal on the floor, and then we'd take bales
of hay with ropes tied around them, and after we
swept the meal off, polished this floor. And some
of the girls came down there peeping in, and we got
them in there and were having chariot races with
them on those bales of hay. This would be some of the
girls that had come down for dancing? For the
dance. So this was when you were cleaning up after
the dance? No, this was before the dance,
polishing the floor. Oh, to get the floor
polished. So you said they put meal on the floor?
They put meal on it for several days so you wouldn't
spill anything on it. And then when they swept that
off, you had to polish the floor. This was so it
would be nice and smooth for the dance? That's
right.
I imagine those chariot races must have been
something to behold. A lot of fun. We slept that in
on the upperclassmen.
You graduated then in the spring of 1920. And I
presume you either had or sought a job at that
point. Did you have a job? Yes, I had a job when I
graduated and I went to Abilene and I was out there
about seven years in the same office. For whom did
you work then? David S. Castle. And that was, what
was, was that a contractor or an architect?
Architect, engineer. Did he specialize in any
particular kind of building? We did principally
educational and institutional commercial work.
Very little residential work of that type. Has
that been sort of what you've done pretty much all
the time? Yes. Institutional rather than
residential. Have you done any residential work?
Yes, some. So you were with Castle? Yes. Who were
some of the other people for whom you worked? Well,
when I left there I went to San Antonio. I was with
Adams and Adams down there for about a year. And
then I went to Lubbock with Peter Strange and
Bradshaw. And we were there until the Depression
got us. Which was what, about 1929 or 30? Well, we
had work that lasted through until 32. And we went
over to the oil boom in Longview in 32. And so was
there a lot of building going on because of the oil
boom? Yes. And so did the whole office move from
Lubbock to? By degrees. We didn't intend to, but we
did before we left. And so you stayed with Peters
then? Yes. Right on through until when? Oh, until
World War II. He was an Aggie. He was a senior when I
was a freshman. This was Peters? M.L. Peters.
Uh-huh. And at the beginning of World War II then,
what, you left Peters and went to somebody else?
Well we went into this defense work that I told you
about of building the Longhorn Ordinance over on
Caddo and then we went together up to Canada. And
then where'd you go to after that? From Canada I
came back and I was out in the Mahoga Desert for
almost a year again on we were constructing a naval
armaments test station at Inyo Kern. At where?
Inyo Kern. And then after that you went where?
After that I came back and went in business here. In
Amarillo? Yes. How did you happen to choose
Amarillo? Well when I was in Lubbock I had become
quite familiar with Amarillo and had friends up
here.
Okay, so you were, what was the name of the company
that you were in? Guy A. Carlander. Guy A.
Carlander. Yes.
And how long were you with that? I was with him again
about seven years and then I left and three of us
organized our own office here. And that was what?
Howard Ensign was the name that went under Ensign
and Fowler and Wright. And you have since retired,
I take it? Yes, I was with Ensign until I retired the
first of January in 69. So you've continued to live
in Amarillo since and have continued your
artwork. Yes. Are you active in any other
endeavors?
Not particularly. Of course, I'm a member of the
American Institute of Architects and the Texas
Society of Architects and the Panhandle chapter.
And except the local. Going back to your career for
a little bit, I believe before we started the
machine earlier, you indicated that you did a good
bit of watercolor of the sketches of buildings.
Right. That, I take it, was your specialty with the
various companies? No, no. There's not enough of
that required. I did general work, a great deal of
designing. Well then, would the company then have
somebody else who would take over those plans and
see that the contractor followed them in
construction? Yes. Did you ever do much of that? A
little bit, not much. Could you indicate a few of
the other jobs on which you worked? Any
outstanding buildings that you can think of? Two
of my favorites are the high school down at Lubbock
High School, they call it now. And that was built
when? In 1929. And I'm quite proud of that job. It's
still being used and added to. And it's one of their
big high schools down there. And I enjoyed very
much the first Presbyterian church in Kilgore,
Texas. Fortunately, they had good funds over
there, and they allowed us to do a real nice Gothic
church. I gather they have a good bit of oil money
over there, do they not? Oh yes. And when was that
one, when did you design that one? In about 39 and
40. So it was in the, just before the war then,
wasn't it? Yes. Any other ones which kind of stick
out in your memory?
Well, we've done quite a bit of church work. I also
like the First Presbyterian Church. Mr. Peters
was a presbyterian, as you may have gathered, in
Longyear. It's a nice church. Was that another one
that was done during the oil boom? Late part of it,
yes, latter part of it. And did you begin with the
idea and then put the idea on paper, or is that
basically what you did? Well, you don't have a
whole idea at once. You develop the thing by stages
and whatnot. When you sit down, say, to design a
church, do you draw the profile first and then the
floor plan, or do you do the floor plan first and
then the... Well, you spend a lot of time studying
their problem and their organization of the
different Sunday school and different
departments. And then you begin to put together
units to fit those various things. And then you tie
them all together, basically with a floor plan
first, but keeping in mind what it's going to look
like in perspective. I suppose you could do a very
utilitarian building that wouldn't look very
nice, and you could also do a building that looks
very nice, but it's not very utilitarian. Quite
right. So I suppose the ideal is to get a
combination of the two. Yes. The present accent is
more on a good plan that's workable and
serviceable and let the exterior fall where it
will. Back when I started, it was the other way.
Exterior was an important thing, and maybe you'd
cramp the plan or what a little bit to fit into the
type of exterior you wanted. I've had very little
personal contact with architects, but I have
heard, well, I lived in New England for a number of
years, and I've heard a number of people there who
complained A neighboring community to us built a
large new high school and for some reason or other
the architect had installed a number of things
which were kind of superfluous really for the
school and it really increased the taxes. I think
he put in a large mural on the exterior which made
the school look nice but he didn't make it a better
school.
Were some of the, were the, you mentioned that when
you first started the emphasis was on an outward
appearance. Did, would this include such things
as, as murals and... Oh no, most of the work then was
classic. And classic is severely balanced. Maybe
a continuous deal and terminations and all of
those motifs and uh... That was the principal
thing in the design, and then if you had to cramp the
exterior, the interior a little bit to fit into
that as a floor plan, you did.
Now with buildings not away from the classic
theme, it's easier to do
units that are more varied and more flexible. But
you would think that today's architect works
with, say, an organization needs a specific floor
space and he has to stick with that and the space
requirements take precedence over the outward
appearance. Yes. Does that bother you at all? Not
at all. Not at all. I think it's... natural result.
What would you say had been some of the, in addition
to this, say the shift from outward
appearance to emphasis on space considerations,
what else have been some fairly significant
developments in architecture and construction
over the past number of years
Well, of course, the primary thing is our use of
steel, which opened up possibilities that were
limited before. There's a lot of difference in how
much you can span with steel as compared to putting
a stone lintel over two posts. What about glass?
Frankly, I think glass has been overdone. You
didn't ask for my opinion, but I couldn't help but
throw it in. We have made all glass exteriors, and
then we go in and have to curtain the light to subdue
it, and we have to add extra air conditioning
because of the heat infiltration and all of those
things. I think there's a happy medium there. In
other words, you think there ought to be a few more
bricks and a little less glass? A little more
masonry, let's say, to break people getting mad at
us. Well, I gather the ever-increasing amounts of
steel would be one of those things which would
permit a greater use of glass. Yes.
A
little more time. Anything, any other comments
you would care to make on... developments, say
recent developments in architecture?
No, I don't feel like I'm qualified to comment. My
day has passed. Since you have retired, have you
dabbled in any kind of architecture other than the
painting you do? No, I practiced architecture
until I was 70 and then I thought it was time for me to
quit and let the younger fellas take over. So have
you done any kind of consulting? Have you looked
over a set of plans to see that they were ? No, no one
has asked that.